# What is it?

This is a Python package for many-body approximation and deformed low-rank approximation that covers the following papers:

- Many-body approximation for non-negative tensors (Neurips2023) [[Paper]](https://neurips.cc/virtual/2023/poster/72780) [[Slide]](https://nips.cc/media/neurips-2023/Slides/72780.pdf)
- Deformed many-body approximation for non-negative tensors (AISTATS2026) [[Paper]] [[Slide]](https://speakerdeck.com/gkazunii/tensor-factorization-meets-deformed-information-geometry-convex-relaxation-under-deformed-algebra)

Our code works on Python 3.12.7 with the required packages:

```
Numpy 2.4.2, scipy 1.15.3
```

# What is the deformed approximation?

For a given tensor `P`, its deformed one-body, two-body, and three-body deformed approximation can be given as follows.

$$
\begin{align}
P_{ijkl} \simeq Q_{ijkl} &= X_i^{(1)} \circledast X_j^{(2)} \circledast X_k^{(3)} \circledast  X_l^{(4)} \\
P_{ijkl} \simeq Q_{ijkl} &= X_{ij}^{(12)} \circledast  X_{ik}^{(13)} \circledast  X_{il}^{(14)} \circledast  X_{jk}^{(23)} \circledast X_{kl}^{(34)} \\
P_{ijkl} \simeq Q_{ijkl} &= X_{ijk}^{(123)} \circledast X_{ijl}^{(124)} \circledast X_{ikl}^{(134)} \circledast  X_{jkl}^{(234)}
\end{align}
$$

where the symbol $\circledast$ denotes the deformed product generated by a non-negative monotonic increasing function $\chi:\mathbb{R}\_{+} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\_{+}$ and approximation is in the sense of the corresponding Bregman divergence to the function $\chi$. If $\chi(x)=x^q$ with hyper-parameter $q>0$, the deformed product is called the Tsallis deformed product, where $q=1$ recovers the standard product, and $q=0$ recovers the standard additive (with bias term), and the corresponding divergence is called the Tsallis divergence $D_q[P,Q]$. Specifically, the Tsallis deformed product is defined as 

$$
a \circledast_q b =
\begin{cases}
a + b - 1, & \text{if } q = 0, \\
\left[a^{1-q} + b^{1-q} - 1\right]_+^{\frac{1}{1-q}}, & \text{if } q \neq 0, 1, \\
ab, & \text{if } q = 1.
\end{cases}
$$

and the Tsallis divergence is defined as 

$$
D_q[P,Q] = \frac{1}{1-q} \frac{1}{\sum_{ijkl} P_{ijkl}^q} \big( 1 - \sum_{ijkl} P\_{ijkl}^{q}Q_{ijkl}^{1-q} \big) 
$$

The parameter $q$ distorts the coordinate system, transforming the Tsallis divergence minimization into a convex optimization problem that eliminates the local minimum issue. In addition, a smaller $q$ value makes the model robust to the noise and outliers. We note that one-body approximation with $\chi(x)=x$ (Tsallis deformation with $q=1$) recovers ordinary rank-1 approximation. Please refer to the paper for more details with other examples of deformation $\chi(x) = x / (cosh(\kappa \log x))$, called Kaniadakis-deformation with hyper-parameter $\kappa$. 

### Global optimality of the deformed many-body approximation

For any $\chi$ function, the correspoiding $\chi$-divergecen 

$$
D\_\chi[P,Q] = \sum_{ijkl} \tilde{\chi}[P_{ijkl}] \big( \log\_{\chi}(P_{ijkl}) - \log\_\chi(Q_{ijkl}) \big)
$$

where the deformed logarithm function and escort distribution $\tilde{\chi}[\cdot]$ is defined as

$$
\log\_{\chi}(t) = \int_{0}^t \frac{ds}{\chi(s)}, \quad \tilde{\chi}[P_{ijkl}] = \frac{\chi[P_{ijkl}]}{\sum_{ijkl} \chi[P_{ijkl}]},
$$

respectvliy. Thus, the deformed many-body approximation has no initial-value dependence. Again, the $\chi$-divergence recovers the KL-divergence if $\chi(t)=t$. The implementation of the deformed logarithm and $\chi$-divergence can be found in `chi_logexp.py` and `divergecen.py`.


# Dual coordinate system for non-negative tensors

In this package, we regard non-negative normalized tensors as discrete joint distributions and describe them using natural and expectation parameters of the deformed exponential family. Let's see an example. Firstly, we define a random rank-1 tensor

```python
import sys
sys.path.append("src/")
import transform
import utils_test
import numpy as np

N = 3
P = utils_test.generate_low_rank_tensor( (N,N), 10, seed=None)
P = P / np.sum(P)
```

We can convert the tensor with natural parameters of the q-exponential family. 

```python
theta = transform.theta_from_prob(P, chi="Tsallis", q=1)
theta
```

where `q=1` denotes a natural parameter without deformation. If we change the value of `q`, it distorts the coordinate system, which changes the parameters. Once you have `theta`, we can obtain the corresponding tensor `T` using `prob_from_theta(theta, chi="Tsallis", q=1)`. The correspondence is one-to-one. We can also obtain the Kaniadakis-deformed representation by option `chi="Kani"` with hyper-parameter `k`, where `k=0` recovers the ordinary exponential family without deformation. In the same way, we obtain a natural parameter:

```python
eta = transform.eta_from_prob(P, chi="Tsallis", q=1)
eta
```

The transformation between `P` and its dual coordinate system can be described as 

$$
P_{ijkl} = \exp_{\chi}\big( \sum_{i'=1}^{i} \sum_{j'=1}^{j} \sum_{k'=1}^{k} \sum_{l'=1}^{l} \theta_{i'j'k'l'} \big), \quad \quad \eta_{ijkl} = \sum_{i'=i}^I\sum_{j'=j}^J\sum_{k'=k}^K\sum_{l'=l}^L \tilde{\chi}[P_{i'j'k'l'}],
$$

where the deformed exponential function $\exp_{\chi}$ is the inverse function of the deformed logarithm function `\log_{\chi}` and we assume that the tensor size of P is $I \times J  \times K  \times L$. 

Our algorithm performs tensor decomposition by leveraging the theta and eta representations of the tensor, as shown below.


# Examples of deformed many-body approximation.

Let's see an example of a many-body approximation. We define the random rank-10 tensor.

```python
import utils_test
N = 8
P = utils_test.generate_low_rank_tensor( (N,N,N,N), 10, seed=None)
P = P / np.sum(P)
```

Then, its three-body approximation can be given as follows:
```python
from mproject import MBA
body = 3
Q, theta, eta, his = MBA(P, body, lr_search=True, Newton=True, max_iter=100, epsilon_auto=True,
                         chi="Tsallis", q=0.5, 
                         verbose_interval=1, verbose=True);
```
where $Q$ is the three-body approximation of the tensor $P$. The resulting tensor $Q$ globally optimizes the Tsallis divergence with $q=0.5$. If $q=1$, it recovers the ordinary many-body approximation, minimizing the KL-divergence. `theta` and `eta` correspond to the natural parameter and expectation parameter of the tensor $Q$, respectively. The deformed many-body approximation reduces a lot of elements in its theta representation `0` to factorize the tensor into the product form. We can confirm the resulting `theta` has a lot of `0` values by simply running `print(theta)`. 

The history of the optimization can be found in `his`. If the option `Newton` is `True`, we use the natural gradient method. The function `chi_FIM` in `hessian.py` finds the Hessian matrix. We recommend using the line search in each iteration by setting `lr_search=True`. Our current line search is based on `scipy.optimize.line_search`. We also recommend setting `epsilon_auto=True` to stabilize the learning. If the optimization is unstable, please try using `Newton_solver="pinv"` and/or change the value of `rel_epsilon` and `rcond`. While our algorithm has no initial-value dependency, we can manually specify the initial parameter using `theta_0`.

We can freely model the interaction using the list of $D$ binary vectors `intracts`, where $D$ is the number of orders of the input tensor. The number of elements in the $n$-th binary vector is the combination of $n$ items taken $D$ at a time. We support $D=4$ below. The following is an example of a many-body approach where the active interaction is specified by `intracts`.

```python
# define interaction with all one-body interactions and
# two-body interactions of (1,2) and (1,4) and
# three-body interactions of (1,2,3).
intracts = [ [1,1,1,1],[1,0,1,0,0,0],[1,0,0,0],[0] ]
Q, theta, eta, his = MBA(P, intracts, lr_search=True, Newton=True, max_iter=100, epsilon_auto=True,
                         chi="Tsallis", q=0.5, 
                         verbose_interval=1, verbose=True);
```

The fast binary vector `[1,1,1,1]` means all one-body interactions are activated. `1` means activated, `0` means deactivated. Then, the second binary vector `[1,0,1,0,0,0]` means two-body interactions (i,j) and (i,k) are activated. Each value corresponds to two-body interactions `[(i,j), (i,k), (i,l), (j,k), (j,l), (k,l)]`. The third binary vector `[1,0,0,0]` means the third-order interaction among (i,j,k) is activated. In the above selected interactions, the tensor $P$ will be factorized into the form of

$$
\begin{align}
P_{ijkl} \simeq Q_{ijkl} = X_{ik} \circledast Y_{ijk} \circledast Z_l.
\end{align}
$$


# Citation

If you use this source code in a scientific publication, please consider citing the following papers:

```
@inproceedings{Ghalamkari2023Many,
    Author = {Ghalamkari, K. and Sugiyama, M. and Kawahara, Y.},
    Title = {Many-body Approximation for Non-negative Tensors},
    Booktitle = {Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
    Volume = {36},
    Pages = {74077--74102},
    Address = {New Orleans, US},
    Month = {December},
    Year = {2023}}

@inproceedings{Ghalamkari2026Deformed,
    Author = {Ghalamkari, K., Taborsky, P., Mørup, M.},
    Title = {Deformed decomposition for non-negative tensors},
    Booktitle = {Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics},
    Volume = {--},
    Pages = {--},
    Address = {Tangier, Morocco},
    Month = {May},
    Year = {2026}}
```

# Further readings

- Convex Manifold Approximation for Tensors [[Theis]](https://ir.soken.ac.jp/records/6661)
- How to choose interaction automatically? [[arXiv]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.11964) 
- Blind Source Separation via Legendre Transformation [[Paper]](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v161/luo21a.html) [[Code]](https://github.com/sjmluo/IGLLM?utm_source=catalyzex.com) [[Slide]](https://github.com/sjmluo/IGLLM/blob/master/IGBSS_NeurIPS2020_Poster.pdf)
- Relationship between many-body approximation and low-rank approximation [[arxiv]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18220)
- Coordinate Descent Method for Log-linear Model on Posets, by Hayashi, S., Sugiyama, M., & Matsushima, S. [[Paper]](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9260027)

# Links to other packages

Many-body approximation
- [Python implementation](https://github.com/kojima-r/pyLegendreDecomposition)
- [Julia implementation](https://github.com/gkazunii/IgTensors/)

Legendre decomposition
- [Python implementation](https://github.com/kojima-r/pyLegendreDecomposition)
- [C++ implementation](https://github.com/mahito-sugiyama/Legendre-decomposition)
- [Python implementation](https://github.com/Yhkwkm/legendre-decomposition-python)

# Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Danish Data Science Academy, which is funded by the Novo Nordisk Foundation, Grant Number NNF21SA0069429.

